The Last Man on the Moon: Eugene Cernan gives a compelling account

“Dream the impossible – and go out and make it happen. I walked on the moon. What can’t you do?” These are the final words spoken by Eugene (Gene) Cernan in the documentary film The Last Man on the Moon. They are a challenge, spoken by a man in his 80s, not just to his grandchildren, but to all of us.

The film gives a personal, compelling account of some of the main events in Cernan’s life as an astronaut, especially his involvement in the Apollo programme. Scenes of Cernan today, visiting locations where he lived and trained, are mixed with historical footage of his younger self. After starting his career as a gung-ho navy pilot in the 1950s, he was selected by Nasa in 1963 to become part of its astronaut training corps. But the film is much more than a biography of Cernan; it is his account of one of the most important parts of the history of human spaceflight.

The Gemini programme gave way to the Apollo programme, which started with a tragedy – a fire, while on the launchpad, on Apollo 1. Cernan speaks with emotion of the accident that took the lives of three of his friends and colleagues, and the effect it had on the remaining astronauts. His first Apollo flight was as a member of the Apollo 10 crew, which went to the Moon, to simulate landing and docking. He was clearly moved by the experience, speaking evocatively of seeing the Earth rise for the first time.

Reflecting on his life, and still travelling as an ambassador, Cernan acknowledges he was selfish, in that he neglected his family for his job. He isn’t the first, and won’t be the last, to make that admission. But he does seem to be a dedicated father in his own way. Footage of his young daughter explaining to a TV reporter her dad had promised to bring her back a moonbeam from his mission certainly shows paternal warmth.

As Neil Armstrong, the first man to walk on the moon, took “one small step” to make “a giant leap for mankind”, so Cernan marked his departure from the moon with “man’s last step from the surface”, hoping that “we shall return, with peace and hope for all mankind”. Only 41 months separated the footprints made by the two men, but their achievements have echoed through the 44 years since Cernan closed the hatch on the lunar module.

